source/extending.rst, before:

.. _extending-asdf:

Extending ASDF
==============

ASDF is designed to be extensible so outside teams can add their own
types and structures while retaining compatibility with tools that
don't understand those conventions.

.. _yaml-schema:

YAML Schema
-----------

.. toctree::
   :hidden:

   schemas/stsci.edu/yaml-schema/draft-01.rst

:ref:`YAML Schema <http://stsci.edu/schemas/yaml-schema/draft-01>` is
a small extension to `JSON Schema Draft 4
<http://json-schema.org/latest/json-schema-validation.html>`__ that
adds some features specific to YAML..  `Understanding JSON Schema
<http://spacetelescope.github.io/understanding-json-schema/>`__
provides a good resource for understanding how to use JSON Schema, and
further resources are available at `json-schema.org
<http://json-schema.org>`__.  A working understanding of JSON Schema
is assumed for this section, which only describes what makes YAML
Schema different from JSON Schema.

Writing a new schema is described in :ref:`designing-schema`.

``tag`` keyword
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

``tag``, which may be attached to any data type, declares that the
element must have the given YAML tag.

For example, the root :ref:`asdf <core/asdf-1.1.0>` schema declares that the
``data`` property must be an :ref:`ndarray <core/ndarray-1.0.0>`.  It does this
not by using the ``tag`` keyword directly, but by referencing the ``ndarray``
schema, which in turn has the ``tag`` keyword.  The ASDF schema includes::

    properties:
      data:
        $ref: "ndarray"

And the :ref:`ndarray
<core/ndarray-1.0.0>` schema includes::

    tag: "tag:stsci.edu:asdf/core/ndarray-1.0.0"

This has the net effect of requiring that the ``data`` property at the
top-level of all ASDF files is tagged as
``tag:stsci.edu:asdf/core/ndarray-1.0.0``.

``propertyOrder`` keyword
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

``propertyOrder``, which applies only to objects, declares that the
object must have its properties presented in the given order.

TBD: It is not yet clear whether this keyword is necessary or desirable.

``flowStyle`` keyword
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Must be either ``block`` or ``flow``.

Specifies the default serialization style to use for an array or
object.  YAML supports multiple styles for arrays/sequences and
objects/maps, called "block style" and "flow style".  For example::

  Block style: !!map
   Clark : Evans
   Ingy  : döt Net
   Oren  : Ben-Kiki

  Flow style: !!map { Clark: Evans, Ingy: döt Net, Oren: Ben-Kiki }

This property gives an optional hint to the tool outputting the YAML
which style to use.  If not provided, the library is free to use
whatever heuristics it wishes to determine the output style.  This
property does not enforce any particular style on YAML being parsed.

``style`` keyword
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Must be ``inline``, ``literal`` or ``folded``.

Specifies the default serialization style to use for a string.  YAML
supports multiple styles for strings::

  Inline style: "First line\nSecond line"

  Literal style: |
    First line
    Second line

  Folded style: >
    First
    line

    Second
    line

This property gives an optional hint to the tool outputting the YAML
which style to use.  If not provided, the library is free to use
whatever heuristics it wishes to determine the output style.  This
property does not enforce any particular style on YAML being parsed.

``examples`` keyword
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The schema may contain a list of examples demonstrating how to use the
schema.  It is a list where each item is a pair.  The first item in
the pair is a prose description of the example, and the second item is
YAML content (as a string) containing the example.

For example::

  examples:
    -
      - Complex number: 1 real, -1 imaginary
      - "!complex 1-1j"

ASDF Schema
-----------

.. toctree::
   :hidden:

   generated/stsci.edu/asdf/core/asdf-1.1.0.rst

:ref:`ASDF Schema <core/asdf-1.1.0>` further extends YAML schema to add
some validations specific to ASDF, notably to do with :ref:`ndarray
<core/ndarray-1.0.0>`.

``ndim`` keyword
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Specifies that the matching ndarray is exactly the given
number of dimensions.

``max_ndim`` keyword
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Specifies that the corresponding ndarray is at most the given number
of dimensions.  If the array has fewer dimensions, it should be
logically treated as if it were "broadcast" to the expected dimensions
by adding 1's to the front of the shape list.

``datatype`` keyword
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Specifies the datatype of the ndarray.

By default, an array is considered "matching" if the array can be cast
to the given datatype without data loss.  For exact datatype matching,
set ``exact_datatype`` to ``true``.

``exact_datatype`` keyword
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If ``true``, the datatype must match exactly, rather than just being
castable to the given datatype without data loss.

.. _designing-schema:

Designing a new tag and schema
------------------------------

The schema included in the ASDF standard will not be adequate for all
needs, but it is possible to mix them with custom schema designed for
a specific purpose.  It is also possible to extend and specialize an
existing schema (described in :ref:`extending-a-schema`).

This section will walk through the development of a new tag and
schema.  In the example, suppose we work at the Space Telescope
Science Institute, which can be found on the world wide web at
``stsci.edu``.  We're developing a new instrument, ``FOO``, and we
need a way to define the specialized metadata to describe the
exposures that it will be generating.

Header
^^^^^^

Every ASDF schema should begin with the following header::

  %YAML 1.1
  ---
  $schema: "http://stsci.edu/schemas/yaml-schema/draft-01"

This declares that the file is ``YAML 1.1`` format, and that the
structure of the content conforms to ``YAML Schema`` defined above.

Tags and IDs
^^^^^^^^^^^^

All of the tags defined by the ASDF standard itself have the following
prefix::

  tag:stsci.edu:asdf/

This prefix is reserved for tags and schemas defined within the ASDF
standard itself.  ASDF can, of course, include any tags, as long as
the tag names are globally unique.  So, for our example instrument,
we'll declare the tag to be::

  tag:stsci.edu:FOO/metadata-1.0.0

Each tag should be associated with a schema in order to validate
it. Each schema must also have a universally unique ``id``, which is
in the form of unique URI.  For the ASDF built-in tags, the mapping
from tag name to schema URI is quite simple::

  tag:stsci.edu:XXX

maps to::

  http://stsci.edu/schemas/XXX

Note that this URI doesn't actually have to resolve to anything.  In
fact, visiting that URL in your web browser is likely to bring up a
``404`` error.  All that's necessary is that it is universally unique
and that the tool reading the ASDF file is able to map from a tag name
to a schema URI, and then load the associated schema.

Again following with our example, we will assign the following URI to
refer to our schema::

  http://stsci.edu/schemas/FOO/metadata-1.0.0

Therefore, in our schema file, we have the following keys, one
declaring the name of the YAML ``tag``, and one defining the ``id`` of
the schema::

  tag: "tag:stsci.edu:FOO/metadata-1.0.0"
  id: "http://stsci.edu/schemas/FOO/metadata-1.0.0"

Descriptive information
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Each schema has some descriptive fields: ``title``, ``description``
and ``examples``.  These fields may contain core markdown syntax.

- ``title``: A one-line summary of what the schema is for.

- ``description``: A lengthier prose description of the schema

- ``examples``: A list of example content that conforms to the schema,
  illustrating how to use it.

Continuing our example::

  title: |
    Metadata for the FOO instrument.
  description: |
    This stores some information about an exposure from the FOO instrument.
  examples:
    -
      - A minimal description of an exposure.
      - |
          !FOO/metadata-1.0.0
            exposure_time: 0.001

The schema proper
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The rest of the schema describes the acceptable data types and their
structure.  The format used for this description comes straight out of
JSON Schema, and rather than documenting all of the things it can do
here, please refer to `Understanding JSON Schema
<http://spacetelescope.github.io/understanding-json-schema/>`__, and
the further resources available at `json-schema.org
<http://json-schema.org>`__.

In our example, we'll define two metadata elements: the name of the
investigator, and the exposure time, each of which also have a
description::

  type: object
  properties:
    investigator:
      type: string
      description: |
        The name of the principal investigator who requested the
        exposure.

    exposure_time:
      type: number
      description: |
        The time of the exposure, in nanoseconds.

We'll also define an optional element for the exposure time unit.
This is a somewhat contrived example to demonstrate how to include
elements in your schema that are based on the custom types defined in
the ASDF standard::

    exposure_time_units:
      $ref: "http://stsci.edu/schemas/asdf/unit/unit-1.0.0"
      description: |
        The unit of the exposure time.
      default:
        s

Lastly, we'll declare ``exposure_time`` as being required, and allow
extra elements to be added::

  required: [exposure_time]
  additionalProperties: true

The complete example
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Here is our complete schema example::

  %YAML 1.1
  ---
  $schema: "http://stsci.edu/schemas/yaml-schema/draft-01"
  tag: "tag:stsci.edu:FOO/metadata-1.0.0"
  id: "http://stsci.edu/schemas/FOO/metadata-1.0.0"

  title: |
    Metadata for the FOO instrument.
  description: |
    This stores some information about an exposure from the FOO instrument.
  examples:
    -
      - A minimal description of an exposure.
      - |
          !FOO/metadata-1.0.0
            exposure_time: 0.001

  type: object
  properties:
    investigator:
      type: string
      description: |
        The name of the principal investigator who requested the
        exposure.

    exposure_time:
      type: number
      description: |
        The time of the exposure, in nanoseconds.

    exposure_time_units:
      $ref: "http://stsci.edu/schemas/asdf/unit/unit-1.0.0"
      description: |
        The unit of the exposure time.
      default:
        s

  required: [exposure_time]
  additionalProperties: true

.. _extending-a-schema:

Extending an existing schema
----------------------------

TODO

Commit message:

Update documentation about custom schema header

source/extending.rst, after:

.. _extending-asdf:

Extending ASDF
==============

ASDF is designed to be extensible so outside teams can add their own
types and structures while retaining compatibility with tools that
don't understand those conventions.

.. _yaml-schema:

YAML Schema
-----------

.. toctree::
   :hidden:

   schemas/stsci.edu/yaml-schema/draft-01.rst

:ref:`YAML Schema <http://stsci.edu/schemas/yaml-schema/draft-01>` is
a small extension to `JSON Schema Draft 4
<http://json-schema.org/latest/json-schema-validation.html>`__ that
adds some features specific to YAML..  `Understanding JSON Schema
<http://spacetelescope.github.io/understanding-json-schema/>`__
provides a good resource for understanding how to use JSON Schema, and
further resources are available at `json-schema.org
<http://json-schema.org>`__.  A working understanding of JSON Schema
is assumed for this section, which only describes what makes YAML
Schema different from JSON Schema.

Writing a new schema is described in :ref:`designing-schema`.

``tag`` keyword
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

``tag``, which may be attached to any data type, declares that the
element must have the given YAML tag.

For example, the root :ref:`asdf <core/asdf-1.1.0>` schema declares that the
``data`` property must be an :ref:`ndarray <core/ndarray-1.0.0>`.  It does this
not by using the ``tag`` keyword directly, but by referencing the ``ndarray``
schema, which in turn has the ``tag`` keyword.  The ASDF schema includes::

    properties:
      data:
        $ref: "ndarray"

And the :ref:`ndarray
<core/ndarray-1.0.0>` schema includes::

    tag: "tag:stsci.edu:asdf/core/ndarray-1.0.0"

This has the net effect of requiring that the ``data`` property at the
top-level of all ASDF files is tagged as
``tag:stsci.edu:asdf/core/ndarray-1.0.0``.

``propertyOrder`` keyword
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

``propertyOrder``, which applies only to objects, declares that the
object must have its properties presented in the given order.

TBD: It is not yet clear whether this keyword is necessary or desirable.

``flowStyle`` keyword
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Must be either ``block`` or ``flow``.

Specifies the default serialization style to use for an array or
object.  YAML supports multiple styles for arrays/sequences and
objects/maps, called "block style" and "flow style".  For example::

  Block style: !!map
   Clark : Evans
   Ingy  : döt Net
   Oren  : Ben-Kiki

  Flow style: !!map { Clark: Evans, Ingy: döt Net, Oren: Ben-Kiki }

This property gives an optional hint to the tool outputting the YAML
which style to use.  If not provided, the library is free to use
whatever heuristics it wishes to determine the output style.  This
property does not enforce any particular style on YAML being parsed.

``style`` keyword
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Must be ``inline``, ``literal`` or ``folded``.

Specifies the default serialization style to use for a string.  YAML
supports multiple styles for strings::

  Inline style: "First line\nSecond line"

  Literal style: |
    First line
    Second line

  Folded style: >
    First
    line

    Second
    line

This property gives an optional hint to the tool outputting the YAML
which style to use.  If not provided, the library is free to use
whatever heuristics it wishes to determine the output style.  This
property does not enforce any particular style on YAML being parsed.

``examples`` keyword
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The schema may contain a list of examples demonstrating how to use the
schema.  It is a list where each item is a pair.  The first item in
the pair is a prose description of the example, and the second item is
YAML content (as a string) containing the example.

For example::

  examples:
    -
      - Complex number: 1 real, -1 imaginary
      - "!complex 1-1j"

ASDF Schema
-----------

.. toctree::
   :hidden:

   generated/stsci.edu/asdf/core/asdf-1.1.0.rst

:ref:`ASDF Schema <core/asdf-1.1.0>` further extends YAML schema to add
some validations specific to ASDF, notably to do with :ref:`ndarray
<core/ndarray-1.0.0>`.

``ndim`` keyword
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Specifies that the matching ndarray is exactly the given
number of dimensions.

``max_ndim`` keyword
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Specifies that the corresponding ndarray is at most the given number
of dimensions.  If the array has fewer dimensions, it should be
logically treated as if it were "broadcast" to the expected dimensions
by adding 1's to the front of the shape list.

``datatype`` keyword
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Specifies the datatype of the ndarray.

By default, an array is considered "matching" if the array can be cast
to the given datatype without data loss.  For exact datatype matching,
set ``exact_datatype`` to ``true``.

``exact_datatype`` keyword
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If ``true``, the datatype must match exactly, rather than just being
castable to the given datatype without data loss.

.. _designing-schema:

Designing a new tag and schema
------------------------------

The schema included in the ASDF standard will not be adequate for all
needs, but it is possible to mix them with custom schema designed for
a specific purpose.  It is also possible to extend and specialize an
existing schema (described in :ref:`extending-a-schema`).

This section will walk through the development of a new tag and
schema.  In the example, suppose we work at the Space Telescope
Science Institute, which can be found on the world wide web at
``stsci.edu``.  We're developing a new instrument, ``FOO``, and we
need a way to define the specialized metadata to describe the
exposures that it will be generating.

Header
^^^^^^

Every ASDF schema should begin with the following header::

  %YAML 1.1
  ---
  $schema: "http://stsci.edu/schemas/yaml-schema/draft-01"

The first lines are the ``YAML`` header and declare that the schema is ``YAML
1.1`` format.

The value of the ``$schema`` keyword indicates that the structure of the
content conforms to ``YAML Schema`` defined above. This is the meta-schema that
may be used to validate the schema itself.

Tags and IDs
^^^^^^^^^^^^

All of the tags defined by the ASDF standard itself have the following
prefix::

  tag:stsci.edu:asdf/

This prefix is reserved for tags and schemas defined within the ASDF
standard itself.  ASDF can, of course, include any tags, as long as
the tag names are globally unique.  So, for our example instrument,
we'll declare the tag to be::

  tag:stsci.edu:FOO/metadata-1.0.0

Each tag should be associated with a schema in order to validate
it. Each schema must also have a universally unique ``id``, which is
in the form of unique URI.  For the ASDF built-in tags, the mapping
from tag name to schema URI is quite simple::

  tag:stsci.edu:XXX

maps to::

  http://stsci.edu/schemas/XXX

Note that this URI doesn't actually have to resolve to anything.  In
fact, visiting that URL in your web browser is likely to bring up a
``404`` error.  All that's necessary is that it is universally unique
and that the tool reading the ASDF file is able to map from a tag name
to a schema URI, and then load the associated schema.

Again following with our example, we will assign the following URI to
refer to our schema::

  http://stsci.edu/schemas/FOO/metadata-1.0.0

Therefore, in our schema file, we have the following keys, one
declaring the name of the YAML ``tag``, and one defining the ``id`` of
the schema::

  tag: "tag:stsci.edu:FOO/metadata-1.0.0"
  id: "http://stsci.edu/schemas/FOO/metadata-1.0.0"

Descriptive information
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Each schema has some descriptive fields: ``title``, ``description``
and ``examples``.  These fields may contain core markdown syntax.

- ``title``: A one-line summary of what the schema is for.

- ``description``: A lengthier prose description of the schema

- ``examples``: A list of example content that conforms to the schema,
  illustrating how to use it.

Continuing our example::

  title: |
    Metadata for the FOO instrument.
  description: |
    This stores some information about an exposure from the FOO instrument.
  examples:
    -
      - A minimal description of an exposure.
      - |
          !FOO/metadata-1.0.0
            exposure_time: 0.001

The schema proper
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The rest of the schema describes the acceptable data types and their
structure.  The format used for this description comes straight out of
JSON Schema, and rather than documenting all of the things it can do
here, please refer to `Understanding JSON Schema
<http://spacetelescope.github.io/understanding-json-schema/>`__, and
the further resources available at `json-schema.org
<http://json-schema.org>`__.

In our example, we'll define two metadata elements: the name of the
investigator, and the exposure time, each of which also have a
description::

  type: object
  properties:
    investigator:
      type: string
      description: |
        The name of the principal investigator who requested the
        exposure.

    exposure_time:
      type: number
      description: |
        The time of the exposure, in nanoseconds.

We'll also define an optional element for the exposure time unit.
This is a somewhat contrived example to demonstrate how to include
elements in your schema that are based on the custom types defined in
the ASDF standard::

    exposure_time_units:
      $ref: "http://stsci.edu/schemas/asdf/unit/unit-1.0.0"
      description: |
        The unit of the exposure time.
      default:
        s

Lastly, we'll declare ``exposure_time`` as being required, and allow
extra elements to be added::

  required: [exposure_time]
  additionalProperties: true

The complete example
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Here is our complete schema example::

  %YAML 1.1
  ---
  $schema: "http://stsci.edu/schemas/yaml-schema/draft-01"
  tag: "tag:stsci.edu:FOO/metadata-1.0.0"
  id: "http://stsci.edu/schemas/FOO/metadata-1.0.0"

  title: |
    Metadata for the FOO instrument.
  description: |
    This stores some information about an exposure from the FOO instrument.
  examples:
    -
      - A minimal description of an exposure.
      - |
          !FOO/metadata-1.0.0
            exposure_time: 0.001

  type: object
  properties:
    investigator:
      type: string
      description: |
        The name of the principal investigator who requested the
        exposure.

    exposure_time:
      type: number
      description: |
        The time of the exposure, in nanoseconds.

    exposure_time_units:
      $ref: "http://stsci.edu/schemas/asdf/unit/unit-1.0.0"
      description: |
        The unit of the exposure time.
      default:
        s

  required: [exposure_time]
  additionalProperties: true

.. _extending-a-schema:

Extending an existing schema
----------------------------

TODO
