source/file_layout.rst, before:

Low-level file layout
=====================

The overall structure of a file is as follows (in order):

- :ref:`header`

- :ref:`tree`, optional

- Zero or more :ref:`block`

ASDF is a hybrid text and binary format.  The header and tree are
text, (specifically, in UTF-8), while the blocks are raw binary.

The low-level file layout is designed in such a way that the tree
section can be edited by hand, possibly changing its size, without
requiring changes in other parts of the file.  The same is not true
for resizing a block, which has an explicit size stored in the file
(except for, optionally, the last block).

Note also that, by design, a ASDF file containing no binary blocks is
also a completely standard and valid YAML file.

.. _header:

Header
------

All ASDF files must start with a short one-line header.  For example::

  %ASDF 0.1.0

It is made up of the following parts (described in EBNF form)::

  asdf_token = "%ASDF"
  major      = integer
  minor      = integer
  micro      = integer
  header     = asdf_token " " major "." minor "." micro ["\r"] "\n"

- ``asdf_token``: The constant string ``%ASDF``.  This can be used
  to quickly identify the file as a ASDF file by reading the first 5
  bytes.  It begins with a ``%`` so it will be treated as a YAML
  comment such that the :ref:`header` and the :ref:`tree` together
  form a valid YAML file.

- ``major``: The major version.

- ``minor``: The minor version.

- ``micro``: The bugfix release version.

.. _tree:

Tree
----

The tree stores structured information using `YAML Ain’t Markup
Language (YAML™) 1.1 <http://yaml.org/spec/1.1/>`__ syntax.  While it
is the main part of most ASDF files, it is entirely optional, and a
ASDF file may skip it completely.  This is useful for creating files
in :ref:`exploded`.  Interpreting the contents of this section is
described in greater detail in :ref:`tree-in-depth`.  This section
only deals with the serialized representation of the tree, not its
logical contents.

The tree is always encoded in UTF-8, without an explicit byteorder
marker (BOM). Newlines in the tree may be either DOS (``"\r\n"``) or
UNIX (``"\n"``) format.

In ASDF |version|, the tree must be encoded in `YAML version 1.1
<http://yaml.org/spec/1.1/>`__.  At the time of this writing, the
latest version of the YAML specification is 1.2, however most YAML
parsers only support YAML 1.1, and the benefits of YAML 1.2 are minor.
Therefore, for maximum portability, ASDF requires that the YAML is
encoded in YAML 1.1.  To declare that YAML 1.1 is being used, the tree
must begin with the following line::

    %YAML 1.1

The tree must contain exactly one YAML document, starting with ``---``
(YAML document start marker) and ending with ``...`` (YAML document
end marker), each on their own line.  Between these two markers is the
YAML content.  For example::

      %YAML 1.1
      %TAG ! tag:stsci.edu:asdf/0.1.0/
      --- !core/asdf
      data: !core/ndarray
        source: 0
        dtype: float64
        shape: [1024, 1024]
      ...

The size of the tree is not explicitly specified in the file, so that
it can easily be edited by hand.  Therefore, ASDF parsers must search
for the end of the tree by looking for the end-of-document marker
(``...``) on its own line.  For example, the following regular
expression may be used to find the end of the tree::

   \r?\n...\r?\n

Though not required, the tree should be followed by some unused space
to allow for the tree to be updated and increased in size without
performing an insertion operation in the file.  It also may be
desirable to align the start of the first block to a filesystem block
boundary.  This empty space may be filled with any content (as long as
it doesn't contain the ``block_magic_token`` described in
:ref:`block`).  It is recommended that the content is made up of space
characters (``0x20``) so it appears as empty space when viewing the
file.

.. _block:

Blocks
------

Following the tree and some empty space, or immediately following the
header, there are zero or more binary blocks.

Blocks represent a contiguous chunk of binary data and nothing more.
Information about how to interpret the block, such as the data type or
array shape, is stored entirely in ``ndarray`` structures in the tree,
as described in :ref:`ndarray
<http://stsci.edu/schemas/asdf/0.1.0/core/ndarray>`.  This allows
for a very flexible type system on top of a very simple approach to
memory management within the file.  It also allows for new extensions
to ASDF that might interpret the raw binary data in ways that are yet
to be defined.

There may be an arbitrary amount of unused space between the end of
the tree and the first block.  To find the beginning of the first
block, ASDF parsers should search from the end of the tree for the
first occurrence of the ``block_magic_token``.  If the file contains
no tree, the first block must begin immediately after the header with
no padding.

.. _block-header:

Block header
^^^^^^^^^^^^

Each block begins with the following header:

- ``block_magic_token`` (4 bytes): Indicates the start of the block.
  This allows the file to contain some unused space in which to grow
  the tree, and to perform consistency checks when jumping from one
  block to the next.  It is make up of the following 4 8-bit characters:

  - in hexadecimal: 89, 42, 4c, 4b
  - in ascii: ``"\211BLK"``

- ``header_size`` (16-bit unsigned integer, big endian): Indicates the
  size of the remainder of the header (not including the length of the
  ``header_size`` entry itself or the ``block_magic_token``).  It is
  stored explicitly in the header itself so that the header may be
  enlarged in a future version of the ASDF standard while retaining
  backward compatibility.  Importantly, ASDF parsers should not assume
  a fixed size of the header, but should obey the ``header_size``
  defined in the file.  In ASDF version 0.1, this should be at least
  40, but may be larger, for example to align the beginning of the
  block content with a file system block boundary.

- ``flags`` (32-bit unsigned integer, big-endian): A bit field
  containing flags (described below).

- ``allocated_size`` (64-bit unsigned integer, big-endian): The amount
  of space allocated for the block (not including the header), in
  bytes.

- ``used_size`` (64-bit unsigned integer, big-endian): The amount of
  used space for the block (not including the header), in bytes.

- ``checksum`` (64-bit unsigned integer, big-endian): An optional MD5
  checksum of the used data in the block.  The special value of 0
  indicates that no checksum verification should be performed.  *TBD*.

- ``encoding`` (16-byte character string): A way to indicate how the
  buffer is compressed or encoded.  *TBD*.

Flags
^^^^^

The following bit flags are understood in the ``flags`` field:

- ``STREAMED`` (0x1): When set, the block is in streaming mode, and it
  extends to the end of the file.  When set, the ``allocated_size``
  and ``used_size`` fields are ignored.  By necessity, any block with
  the ``STREAMED`` bit set must be the last block in the file.

Block content
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Immediately following the block header, there are exactly
``used_space`` bytes of meaningful data, followed by
``allocated_space - used_space`` bytes of unused data.  The exact
content of the unused data is not enforced.  The ability to have gaps
of unused space allows a ASDF writer to reduce the number of disk
operations when updating the file.

.. _exploded:

Exploded form
-------------

Exploded form expands a self-contained ASDF file into multiple files:

- An ASDF file containing only the header and tree, which by design is
  also a valid YAML file.

- *n* ASDF files, each containing a single block.

Exploded form is useful in the following scenarios:

- Not all text editors may handle the hybrid text and binary nature of
  the ASDF file, and therefore either can't open a ASDF file or would
  break a ASDF file upon saving.  In this scenario, a user may explode
  the ASDF file, edit the YAML portion as a pure YAML file, and
  implode the parts back together.

- Over a network protocol, such as HTTP, a client may only need to
  access some of the blocks.  While reading a subset of the file can
  be done using HTTP ``Range`` headers, it still requires one (small)
  request per block to "jump" through the file to determine the start
  location of each block.  This can become time-consuming over a
  high-latency network if there are many blocks.  Exploded form allows
  each block to be requested directly by a specific URI.

- An ASDF writer may stream a table to disk, when the size of the table
  is not known at the outset.  Using exploded form simplifies this,
  since a standalone file containing a single table can be iteratively
  appended to without worrying about any blocks that may follow it.

Exploded form describes a convention for storing ASDF file content in
multiple files, but it does not require any additions to the file
format itself.  There is nothing indicating that a ASDF file is in
exploded form, other than the fact that some or all of its blocks come
from external files.  The exact way in which a file is exploded is up
to the library and tools implementing the standard.  In the simplest
scenario, to explode a file, each :ref:`ndarray source property
<http://stsci.edu/schemas/asdf/0.1.0/core/ndarray/anyOf/1/properties/source>`
in the tree is converted from a local block reference into a relative
URI.

Commit message:

Specify units of header_size and minor changes
* Include bytes unit in header_size description
* Replace 'a ASDF file' by 'an ASDF file'

source/file_layout.rst, after:

Low-level file layout
=====================

The overall structure of a file is as follows (in order):

- :ref:`header`

- :ref:`tree`, optional

- Zero or more :ref:`block`

ASDF is a hybrid text and binary format.  The header and tree are
text, (specifically, in UTF-8), while the blocks are raw binary.

The low-level file layout is designed in such a way that the tree
section can be edited by hand, possibly changing its size, without
requiring changes in other parts of the file.  The same is not true
for resizing a block, which has an explicit size stored in the file
(except for, optionally, the last block).

Note also that, by design, an ASDF file containing no binary blocks is
also a completely standard and valid YAML file.

.. _header:

Header
------

All ASDF files must start with a short one-line header.  For example::

  %ASDF 0.1.0

It is made up of the following parts (described in EBNF form)::

  asdf_token = "%ASDF"
  major      = integer
  minor      = integer
  micro      = integer
  header     = asdf_token " " major "." minor "." micro ["\r"] "\n"

- ``asdf_token``: The constant string ``%ASDF``.  This can be used
  to quickly identify the file as an ASDF file by reading the first 5
  bytes.  It begins with a ``%`` so it will be treated as a YAML
  comment such that the :ref:`header` and the :ref:`tree` together
  form a valid YAML file.

- ``major``: The major version.

- ``minor``: The minor version.

- ``micro``: The bugfix release version.

.. _tree:

Tree
----

The tree stores structured information using `YAML Ain’t Markup
Language (YAML™) 1.1 <http://yaml.org/spec/1.1/>`__ syntax.  While it
is the main part of most ASDF files, it is entirely optional, and a
ASDF file may skip it completely.  This is useful for creating files
in :ref:`exploded`.  Interpreting the contents of this section is
described in greater detail in :ref:`tree-in-depth`.  This section
only deals with the serialized representation of the tree, not its
logical contents.

The tree is always encoded in UTF-8, without an explicit byteorder
marker (BOM). Newlines in the tree may be either DOS (``"\r\n"``) or
UNIX (``"\n"``) format.

In ASDF |version|, the tree must be encoded in `YAML version 1.1
<http://yaml.org/spec/1.1/>`__.  At the time of this writing, the
latest version of the YAML specification is 1.2, however most YAML
parsers only support YAML 1.1, and the benefits of YAML 1.2 are minor.
Therefore, for maximum portability, ASDF requires that the YAML is
encoded in YAML 1.1.  To declare that YAML 1.1 is being used, the tree
must begin with the following line::

    %YAML 1.1

The tree must contain exactly one YAML document, starting with ``---``
(YAML document start marker) and ending with ``...`` (YAML document
end marker), each on their own line.  Between these two markers is the
YAML content.  For example::

      %YAML 1.1
      %TAG ! tag:stsci.edu:asdf/0.1.0/
      --- !core/asdf
      data: !core/ndarray
        source: 0
        dtype: float64
        shape: [1024, 1024]
      ...

The size of the tree is not explicitly specified in the file, so that
it can easily be edited by hand.  Therefore, ASDF parsers must search
for the end of the tree by looking for the end-of-document marker
(``...``) on its own line.  For example, the following regular
expression may be used to find the end of the tree::

   \r?\n...\r?\n

Though not required, the tree should be followed by some unused space
to allow for the tree to be updated and increased in size without
performing an insertion operation in the file.  It also may be
desirable to align the start of the first block to a filesystem block
boundary.  This empty space may be filled with any content (as long as
it doesn't contain the ``block_magic_token`` described in
:ref:`block`).  It is recommended that the content is made up of space
characters (``0x20``) so it appears as empty space when viewing the
file.

.. _block:

Blocks
------

Following the tree and some empty space, or immediately following the
header, there are zero or more binary blocks.

Blocks represent a contiguous chunk of binary data and nothing more.
Information about how to interpret the block, such as the data type or
array shape, is stored entirely in ``ndarray`` structures in the tree,
as described in :ref:`ndarray
<http://stsci.edu/schemas/asdf/0.1.0/core/ndarray>`.  This allows
for a very flexible type system on top of a very simple approach to
memory management within the file.  It also allows for new extensions
to ASDF that might interpret the raw binary data in ways that are yet
to be defined.

There may be an arbitrary amount of unused space between the end of
the tree and the first block.  To find the beginning of the first
block, ASDF parsers should search from the end of the tree for the
first occurrence of the ``block_magic_token``.  If the file contains
no tree, the first block must begin immediately after the header with
no padding.

.. _block-header:

Block header
^^^^^^^^^^^^

Each block begins with the following header:

- ``block_magic_token`` (4 bytes): Indicates the start of the block.
  This allows the file to contain some unused space in which to grow
  the tree, and to perform consistency checks when jumping from one
  block to the next.  It is make up of the following 4 8-bit characters:

  - in hexadecimal: 89, 42, 4c, 4b
  - in ascii: ``"\211BLK"``

- ``header_size`` (16-bit unsigned integer, big endian): Indicates the
  size of the remainder of the header (not including the length of the
  ``header_size`` entry itself or the ``block_magic_token``), in bytes.
  It is stored explicitly in the header itself so that the header may be
  enlarged in a future version of the ASDF standard while retaining
  backward compatibility.  Importantly, ASDF parsers should not assume
  a fixed size of the header, but should obey the ``header_size``
  defined in the file.  In ASDF version 0.1, this should be at least
  40, but may be larger, for example to align the beginning of the
  block content with a file system block boundary.

- ``flags`` (32-bit unsigned integer, big-endian): A bit field
  containing flags (described below).

- ``allocated_size`` (64-bit unsigned integer, big-endian): The amount
  of space allocated for the block (not including the header), in
  bytes.

- ``used_size`` (64-bit unsigned integer, big-endian): The amount of
  used space for the block (not including the header), in bytes.

- ``checksum`` (64-bit unsigned integer, big-endian): An optional MD5
  checksum of the used data in the block.  The special value of 0
  indicates that no checksum verification should be performed.  *TBD*.

- ``encoding`` (16-byte character string): A way to indicate how the
  buffer is compressed or encoded.  *TBD*.

Flags
^^^^^

The following bit flags are understood in the ``flags`` field:

- ``STREAMED`` (0x1): When set, the block is in streaming mode, and it
  extends to the end of the file.  When set, the ``allocated_size``
  and ``used_size`` fields are ignored.  By necessity, any block with
  the ``STREAMED`` bit set must be the last block in the file.

Block content
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Immediately following the block header, there are exactly
``used_space`` bytes of meaningful data, followed by
``allocated_space - used_space`` bytes of unused data.  The exact
content of the unused data is not enforced.  The ability to have gaps
of unused space allows an ASDF writer to reduce the number of disk
operations when updating the file.

.. _exploded:

Exploded form
-------------

Exploded form expands a self-contained ASDF file into multiple files:

- An ASDF file containing only the header and tree, which by design is
  also a valid YAML file.

- *n* ASDF files, each containing a single block.

Exploded form is useful in the following scenarios:

- Not all text editors may handle the hybrid text and binary nature of
  the ASDF file, and therefore either can't open an ASDF file or would
  break an ASDF file upon saving.  In this scenario, a user may explode
  the ASDF file, edit the YAML portion as a pure YAML file, and
  implode the parts back together.

- Over a network protocol, such as HTTP, a client may only need to
  access some of the blocks.  While reading a subset of the file can
  be done using HTTP ``Range`` headers, it still requires one (small)
  request per block to "jump" through the file to determine the start
  location of each block.  This can become time-consuming over a
  high-latency network if there are many blocks.  Exploded form allows
  each block to be requested directly by a specific URI.

- An ASDF writer may stream a table to disk, when the size of the table
  is not known at the outset.  Using exploded form simplifies this,
  since a standalone file containing a single table can be iteratively
  appended to without worrying about any blocks that may follow it.

Exploded form describes a convention for storing ASDF file content in
multiple files, but it does not require any additions to the file
format itself.  There is nothing indicating that an ASDF file is in
exploded form, other than the fact that some or all of its blocks come
from external files.  The exact way in which a file is exploded is up
to the library and tools implementing the standard.  In the simplest
scenario, to explode a file, each :ref:`ndarray source property
<http://stsci.edu/schemas/asdf/0.1.0/core/ndarray/anyOf/1/properties/source>`
in the tree is converted from a local block reference into a relative
URI.
